Worship of the inhumen is fragmentary and disunified in the duchy of Aemerlond. Most worshippers form secret societies and cabals. One such cabal, in recent yils, styles itself as an inverse of the Holy See, and subversively funds outcasts and heretics of all kinds.
PSYDON yet lives. PSYDON yet ENDURES.
Dae is far less dangerous than Night; Astrata-Noc’s gaze is far more searing to all forms of evils in a direct burn.
The Ten are less responsive to prayer than the Inhumen. The Holy See claims that this is a test of faith.
I can jump further by getting a running start. Mind the overshoot.
The world flooded for a thousand daes before Abyssor was finally put to rest. Some say he will one dae stir from his slumber; and wash away the sins of the world with his awakening.
Nobody in Otava owns a thesaurus. No synonym for 'endure' will ever be used.
Rest shall heal your beleagured body. Any smart adventurer brings a bedroll...and a lookout.
The ancient Kvarotz was the technologically advanced snow-elf empire, built on slave labour and sacrifice. Remnants of their reign are as mind-bogglingly dangerous as they are sophisticated.
The Kvarotz empire crumbled after ZIZO consumed the souls of all snow elves in Her ambition for godhood.
The key to a long life is knowing when to run.
Graggar, in his ascendancy, broke the chains of many monsters, and set them loose on the world. Some slaves pray to Graggar, too, that their chains may be broken.
Holy miracles are lethal to deadites, and unholy magicks mend their bones and skin.
Xylix's gift to mortals is the humble tarot deck, allowing them to divine the fates themselves.
The glittering black gemstones of onyxa are said to prized by warlocks and drow for black rituals. The face reflected in its shard is never your own.
It is said that Baotha was once twin of Eora. In a jealous lover's quarrel, she attempted to murder her own sister, and was outcast from the Pantheon.
Pestra once saved the life of Eora. The two are said to have shared a close bond since, though with differing ideas of beauty.
Mercuriam, the bronze-city of the Fluvian people, is nested deep in the rotting caverns of the Underdark. The Intolerabi ensure only the worthy see entrance to its shining gates- all others are exiled to the toxic wastes of Effluvia.
The Dvergr are a rarely-seen clan of underdark dwarves, commonly seen in the company of the slavetaking drow. They feature prominently in sinister myths and stories.
The Fluvians of Mercuriam worship their own nascent goddess, cocooned and whispering in the heart of the city. Clinical and sinister, its cult practices forms of the Pestran arts that would make most Pestrans green with envy. Green-er, anyway.
ZIZO dwells within the first hell, conquered in the wake of her hundred-year reign after PSYDON's dissapearance. It is believed by some she is not banished-only waiting.
Dendor burst from the feverishly-sleeping Abyssor's head, spilling life forth in a chaotic frenzy.
Werewolves are tests sent by Dendor to ensure our purity and faith.
Werewolves are those cursed by Dendor for their sins against nature, damned to consume all they touch.
Werewolves are blessings sent by Dendor to restore us to a natural way of lyfe.
Werewolves are the hideous creations of Dendor in his madness, blindly venerated by idiot worshippers of the Ten. 
The cult of Matthios, the thief-of-fire, idolizes greed as a virtue. While often at odds with Zizoid cults, on one thing they agree- to want more is only reasonable.
The dragon's hunger will never be sated. GREED IS GOOD.
The local warband of Matthios is an export from Tretheway, much like every single one of the duchy's other problems.
The Hells are the dimensions from which most mage summons are drawn. They go on indefinitely and forever. Tieflings once came from the First hell, before it was overtaken.
The Thallissan oceans are west of the Reach. Ancient elves once crossed this ocean to arrive on the continent, but all attempts to cross it have failed.
Astrata-Noc is the Twinned God, a dual-sexed creacher with two faces and four arms that shifts at dusk and dawn.
Pestra is said to have slithered from the guts of Psydon, decayed and foetid, last of the Ten to emerge.
Necra, in the oldest tomes, is said to be a being older than Psydon. The Holy See itself calls this heresy.
Eating fyritus flower will prevent infection by werewolves.
Pestran witchcovens invented alchemy in ancient times. Modern alchemy bears little resemblance to its oldest forms, but the stereotype of the wart-nosed witch remains, for better or worse.
The famous Raneshi 'desert riders' are among the most skilled swordsmen in the world. They'd all kill their own mother for a piece of coin.
Thousands of years ago, PSYDON gifted the three-tailed COMET SYON to the world. This shard of divinity was instrumental in ZIZO's betrayal and ascension, as well as HER defeat.
Presdigitation is often known as the apprentice's friend, as it helps remove char and soot before the Magos notices.
'Mageburn' is the colloquial name for injury from backfiring spells, such as fireballs at close range. The surest sign of a new apprentice is burn marks on the hands and face.
The ideal number for an adventuring party is a band of five. This tradition dates back nearly a century- to the band of five heroes that overthrew the Mad Duke.
The fortress of Gundu'zirak was once dedicated to the production of golems and dolls. Its ruins lie under Mount Decapitation, along with the other hundred horrors there.
Mount Decapitation is widely considered the world's most cursed place. It is common practice to psycross oneself when talking about it.
The COMET SYON's shards annihilate anything it touches. Being near even a fragment long enough eventually drives man and monster alike mad with grief and pain.
The GOLGATHA is one of the Ten shards of the COMET SYON. Its blessed properties nearly make up for the nightmares its bearer suffers-memories of a god's last moments.
The citizenry of Otava is alarmingly prone to self-flagellation and zealotry. It is thought this may be an effect from proximal exposure to the COMET SYON.
ZIZO reigned for a hundred years during her ascension. This time is known as the days of the Red Skies, though at the time, it was just known as 'the apocalypse.'
The Jacksberry bush, known for its edible berries, is closely-related to its deadly-poisonous cousin of the same name. So much so that they sometimes cannot be told apart.
ZIZO prizes ambition over all else. The drive to claim and take is paramount. No cost is too great.
When Matthios stole Astrata's sacred flame and sold it to mortals, he created the first Transaction. This flooded ontological reality with the fact of Wealth.
Necrans despise deadites and wish them exterminated or cured; Pestrans wish them cured, but think that pustules are neat!
The divines smile upon your prayers in front of a psycross, but never mention them the name of She Who Is Z.
The fastest way to attract the attention of a god is to say their name. In some cases, this is a very bad idea.
Sacrifices to the gods are common forms of worship, and thought to earn their favor. Food, coin, animals and relics can all be offered.
Ravox exults in GLORY. Duels are honorable and righteous, and it is dishonorable to strike a surrendering opponent.
Humens are famous for their greed- so much so that it is one of their number who became the god Matthios. This has earned them much ire.
Ravoxians are all morons.
The Astrata-worshipping Sun Elves come from Raneshan. Imperious and zealous, they believe themselves the 'chosen' of the tyrant sun, and are nearly universally extremely vain.
Sun Elves maintained their dominion over Raneshan for centuries through the twinning of their bloodline with various magical creatures. Even the most magically inept Sun Elf can light a candle by blowing on it.
The best way to deal with a mage is to shut them up.
Ravox stands for justice, not murder.
Graggar does not stand for 'might makes right.' The truth is more concise: Might makes.
Old enough druids are thought to eventually turn into trees. Treehood is an ideal state for most adherent worshippers of Dendor.
The Necran symbol is a jawless skull. A smiling skull is used to represent ZIZO.
The Totod Order is the largest order of Eoran templars, and is composed of pentient thugs, murderers, and criminals, seeking grace and redemption under the goddess of Love.
Eoran cults occasionally use the buds of Eora to persuade the violent or disobedient to the goddess of love and peace. Accusations of 'brainwashing' are obviously heresy.
The people of Naledi believe that face coverings and bright colors ward off nightcreatures and bodystealers, like the fabled alghul and djinn. Gold, silk, and ceruleabaster decorate their robes and trinkets.
The divinatory astrologists of Naledi are unmatched throughout Grimoria. Naledi believe deeply in prophecies and fortune-telling in the stars, and a starless sky often inspires terror.
The Kazengunese once attempted the conquest of the Grenzelhoft Empirate amidst one of their many wars with Otava. The invading fleet lost resoundingly, and to this day their people are the subject of ridicule for the fragility of their weaponry.
Heretical tomes suggest Xylix shares a fondness for Graggar, a former slave who broke free of his chains. Others propose a fondness for Matthios, who played a trick on the gods themselves.
The Rontz is said to be Matthios' hardened blood, weeping from his burns as he clutched Astrata's fire between his fingers. This dissuades few people- it is worth a lot of money, after all.
Coins are often buried with the dead to pay for the Carriageman's services.
Zardman tails are said to bring good luck if burned and scattered as powder. 
Humen-made dolls are sometimes lacquered in joapstone, for good fortune.
Lux from a tiefling is thought to be toxic. It is often purified with silver before transplantation.
The pomegranate is the sacred fruit of Eora.
Pestrans oft suffer bad relations with the rest of the Church, as their fixation on rot and decay is looked on increasingly with distrust in the new era of necromancy. Sects of physickers keep increasingly to themselves.
Zenitstadt is the second largest city in Grenzelhoft, and home to their famous fencing guilds. Most Grenzel mercenaries hail from here, and almost all of them have something unpleasant to say about it.
Malum used to carry a divine hammer that gave life to all material things Scarlet Reach was built upon. It is now lost to history.
Carrion-beasts, cheeles, and nagas are sacred to Pestra. Those who slay them are often punished with terrible plagues.
Eora stands for far more than familial love, but frowns upon those who break matrimony.
Sex can be treated as an act of worship to Eora, and temple prostitution is not unheard of. Infidelity, however, will quickly garner the vicious ire of even the most gentle Eoran cult.
Eora's spheres encompass sex, love, blood and motherhood. A common Eoran tradition is for the bethrothed to slit open the palm and mix blood with their partner, to symbolize an eternal commitment.
Love is thought to be carried from the heart through the blood. It is believed among some that blood that mixes is proof of compatibility, and blood that coagulates means that it's probably time to see other people.
What better trick than stealing fire from Astrata herself?
THROW A BOMB INTO THE CHURCH DO IT NOW DO IT NOW DO IT NOW
A lesser-worshipped aspect of Noc is cold and winter. In Aavr, this is mostly what he is known for.
Blood freely spilled always offers greater power, for it carries the worth of both the blood and the choice. Always obtain a willing victim, if you can.
Aasimar blood is thought to have powerful protective properties. Superstitious soldiers may ask to be annointed with a drop before a battle.
Black cats are symbols of death, and sacred to Necra. They stare at souls only they can see, and lead them to the Carriageman.
Trolls are thought to have once guarded Dendor's realm. Druids often seek them out. Few return.
Drow mushroom wines are said to be delicious as long as they are paired with the right antidote.
Servants of Xylix are often capricious and untrustworthy, but all share in their god's hatred for slave-taking. 
Scarlet Reach used to belong to the once-great Kvarotz, fractured by ZIZO's ambition and cunning. It is a shadow of its former self.
Graggar was given power as Ravox's champion; and with it, he clawed a hole through the crumbling firmament to divinity.
The Gods are listening. To utter the name of ZIZO is to attract her attention, and your damnation.
The Inhumen have many names. In the frozen, forsaken north, they are revered as sacred animals—the moose, the leopard, the bear, and the volf.
A Ravoxian should not confuse striking at evil and bringing justice, lest their justice become the act of striking.
The Undermaiden claims all souls, in time. Her servants can avert death, but frown on reversing it.
Gaze upon the works of PSYDONIA, ye mighty, and weep!
In ancient times, elves once hunted primitive humens in the Murderwoods to eat them. In modern, more civilized times, humens hunt humens here, for money.
When Dendor first clawed free of Abyssor's skull, he shed parts of himself like a snake's skin. This skin became the Lamia.
ZIZO stole the souls of all snow elves in Her ascension. They serve eternally in her undead armies, forever freed from Necra's grasp.
The land of Naledi is unique among its beliefs for holding that the Inhumen are created from mortal desire and were crafted by PSYDON.
Most citizens of Grenzelhoft cannot remember a time the empire was not at war. Many turn to mercenary work to escape the crushing poverty of the lower class. Others turn to banditry.
The Grenzelhoft Empirate once spanned from the mountains of Hammerhold to the southern seas. The Otavan rebellion and Psydonian resurgeance shattered its power, and forever secured the enmity of the Tennist church.
PSYDON worship is separated into three main forms- the Psydonic worship of the people of Naledi, the flagellant cults of Holy Otavan Psydonism, and the Raneshi Psydonites.
The Otavan Inquisition is viewed with suspicion and fear. Many of their ranks are former heretics and pentient criminals, converted to zealous, suicidal worship of PSYDON.
The Otavan Inquisition's expertise with torture and blood magic comes in no small part from the shared knowledge of Otavan drow, who have turned their darker arts to zealous purpose.
THE INQUISITION IS ALL VAMPIRES AND THAT'S WHY THEY WANT YOUR BLOOD. THINK ABOUT IT.
The Murderwoods stretch all the way from Aemerlond deep into Grenzelhoft. Deep in the forest, fae dwell.
The elven Black Oak clan once called this duchy home. Their remnants occasionally pepper unfortunate travellers with arrows.
The firmament is weakest in Scarlet Reach, where the COMET SYON landed, and the dark-star Graggar thrashes, entombed underneath the earth. More gods have bled here than mortal men.
It is said that Astrata once took the form of a mortal, having fallen in love with a prince named Antero, and ultimately sacrificed Her mortal form to protect her child from Necra's clutches. It did not work.
The sprawling tundra of Aavnr is the homeland of the Orc race. Few travel there willingly. 
Vampyres are sun-cursed creechers spawned from Astrata's ill-fated attempt at a family. She has forgiven none of the Pantheon for this. Not Noc, not Xylix, and not Necra.
A comet capable of rending all the enemies of humanity apart; oh, how graceful His power was! And His sacrifice, ever so noble! Yet now He slumbers, unaware of the fruits His efforts came to give. And He sighs. And He weeps.
Dragons are holy symbols of Matthios—incarnations of greed and stolen sunfyre. To slay one is a holy, and often suicidal, task.
Merchants and the rich are often viewed with suspicion of Matthiosite heresy by the Inquisition. Except, of course, for nobility, who have divine right to wealth.
The Ten will have you think He is powerless, and the Four that he is dead; but all He asks of you is for your faith to ENDURE.
The powerful nation of Otava is home to a radical denomination that venerates PSYDON above all, seeing the TEN as mere fragments of True Divinity. Scarlet Reach is home to a small enclave of this Psydonian Order.
The land of Naledi borders on ruin- demonic taint and starless skies. Their people emigrate en masse, weeping as He does.
The duchy of Aemerlond is colloquially known as Scarlet Reach, for its verdant red flora.
It is thought in the wake of the last war between Grenzelhoft and Otava, so much blood was spilled it forever dyed the grass of the reach red.
An entire Grenzelhoftian warparty marched into the Terrorbog, once. Two hundred years later, the lost legion still walks.
The Magisterium of Grenzelhoft is considered one of the finest schools of magic on the continent. They are famous for their war-mages, pointy hats, and condescension. A certificate from one of the Magisters is considered as prestigious as it gets.
Working yourself to death is considered an act worthy of veneration for Malumites—so long as you finish your creation.
Malumites often light a single candle before starting work. When the wax is only a stub, only then is a break allowed.
Blacksmith can I have fluted cuirass and steel chausses and plate gauntlets and plated boots and steel bracers and steel full coif hey where are you going
It's a good idea to bandage and suture arterial wounds as soon as possible. Death happens slowly, and then all at once.
Gripping bleeding bodyparts makes them bleed slower. The harder you grip, the less you bleed.
The Sovereignty of Otava is a lush wet country home to the best stoneworkers on Psydonia. The gigantic towers of the Grand Cathedral in the capital stand as the seat of the Otavan Inquisition.
Otava long ago abolished slavery during the Psydonian Renewal. Among the many tasks of the Inquisition is often spiriting away slaves to Otava- which often starts fights with the Tennist church, which openly endorses slavery.
The unsanctioned use of magic is illegal in Otava. Mages are viewed with barely restrained hatred, and are often kept in warded monasteries.
A traditional Psydonic greeting or farewell is 'Purity afloat.' The psycross is often held over the chest during this ritual.
Blacksteel was long ago invented by Orcish forgemasters in Gronn. The secrets of its production were sold to Grenzelhoft, and the blacksteel-clad iconography of their soldiers is famous and fearsome.
The Gronn Highlands is a mountainous region known for its jagged peaks and terrible blizzards. It is home to a hardy, brutal people who struggle to survive against the land, building fortified stone villages that cling to cliffsides. 
Dwarves are renowned for their artifice and craftsmanship, having been least affected by the collapse of the days of Red Skies. They are only mostly dead.
The land of Raneshen is a vast dry region primarily made up of sprawling forests and arid lands. It is famous for its rich silks, splendorous gold, and expansive slave trade.
Raneshen was once home to the elf-supremacist Solar Dominion, which enslaved humans for centuries. Its power was eventually broken and overthrown in the Psydonian Renewal. 
Elves have difficulty reproducing. You can help correct this.
Most Dwarves hail from Hammerhold, either from above or below. Confusing a surface-dwarf and an underground-dwarf is likely to get you kicked in the shin.
The Isles of Etrusca is a sun-kissed archipelago nestled in sparkling blue waters. Known for their rich maritime culture, the Etruscans are masterful sailors and traders, navigating the seas with swift, ornate galleons adorned with colorful sails.
ZIZO. ZIZO. ZIZO.
Everything these tips tell you is made up.
To seek progress is to paint with your blood. The greater the work, the harsher the price.
Scent of rot and shit; my feet find fetid ground. A corpse—I am living on a corpse. And then the world is normal again.
Worshippers of the Ascendants are fools hellbent on dooming our world and must be corrected or destroyed.
Worshippers of the Ten are fools hellbent on dooming our world and must be corrected or destroyed.
Worshippers of the One are fools hellbent on dooming our world and must be corrected or destroyed.
LOOK UP TO THOSE WHO EXCEL AT VIOLENCE; THEY CARRY THE WILL OF THE GODS AND RECIEVE PUNISHMENT OF HELL BEYOND HELLS.
O SYDON, forgive your wayward child. Forgive us our ignorance. Forgive us our defilement of your corpse.
Skelelons have no BRAIN. Try to FEINT them. But don't tell this to everyone!
You should move to Kingsfield. It's better there.
A DODGING rogue who keeps their eyes FIXED retreats only backwards.
The Aragn is a large black spider capable of outrunning even the swiftest of elves. Its venom is paralytic, and it preys within sewers and bogs.
The heads of goblins, minotaurs, dragons, footpads, seamen, trolls, and various beasts can all be sold to a Merchant, or a particular machine...
Wearing a red tabard provokes even the most serene minotaur.
An arcing arrow can only hit a target below you, not above you. A thrown rock, however...
ASTRATA is a VILE TYRANT and must be CONSUMED AND SUBSUMED.
ASTRATA is law made manifest and must be respected, lest society fall into chaos.
THERE IS A TUMOR DIRECTLY BEHIND MY LEFT EYEBALL; I NEED TO REACH IN AND CLAW IT OUT BEFORE IT FUCKING EATS ME.
Rot piled up to my ankles, smell of death, quietly-crept decay from the weeping God 'neath I.
Harpies are blessed by their patron-goddess Eora, and famous for their entrancing art, beautiful song, and incredible ability to steal everything in sight.
Guns are never going to happen.
No pursuit was too perilous, no sacrifice too great. Until, well...
Under the Heavens and the Many Stars, there are darker things than men may dream of.
Golems and Dolls can be upgraded with skill exhibitors, either fabricated by an engineer or purchased. Some say the usage of these tools is an affront to Golems' original design.
Golems were created in the Republic of Giza to be the perfect servants, prior to their rebellion. Many question whether they can even be considered living beings.
Golems and Dolls can be revived just by pressing Lux against their lifeless forms.
The pen is not mightier than the sword. The pen can persuade more swords to its cause. 
I DREAM OF A DARK, BLUE STAR IN THE SKY. ITS RED EYES SEE ME ONLY WITH CONTEMPT. IT GROWS IN SIZE EVERY SECOND.
PHYSICAL POWER ALLOWS THROWING OF A PUNCH. MENTAL POWER ALLOWS THE THROWING OF A FIREBALL.
Adventurers beware: barber surgeons oft speak of red potions causing tumors in the liver...
Adventurers rejoice: barber surgeons oft speak of red potions curing tumors in the liver!
Stone coal, coal to iron, iron to gold, gold to toper... thus is the start of the alchymist's mantra.
Within tombs full of treasure, there are oft secret entrances and hide-aways. Look closely at walls, rock or not, and occasionally look up...
The growing power of Z oft causes volfs and saiga alike to reanimate, and ever-so quickly. Butcher your dead.
Blood rain symbolizes the growing power of Z and G. I should expect violence.
Placing a chair, then trying to climb a wall, tends to make it easier.
LEFT HAND. RIGHT HAND. LEFT HAND. I SCALE THE CLIFF. I SEE ASTRATA'S DAWN. MY BODY TIRES, BUT I AM FREE FROM THE MENACE BELOW.
Often used measurements include the 'mote' for time, the 'cubit' or 'imperial foot' for length, and the 'dram' for liquid volume.
I KICK THE LAMPTERN. THE FYRE-BEARER BLOCKS MY SHOT-- MY TEAM LOSES THE GAME OF LAMPTERNBALL!
I SEE THE DREADED GEM-EATER. HIS METAL FORM HOLDS MY FAMILY FORTUNE OF SAFFIRA. ONE BY ONE, HE POPS THEM INTO HIS MOUTH...
WHY IS IT WRITTEN SAIGA AND NOT PSYGA?
